
# D-Lab Data Wrangling Workshop

[![DataHub](https://img.shields.io/badge/launch-datahub-blue)](https://datahub.berkeley.edu/hub/user-redirect/git-pull?repo=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fdlab-berkeley%2FR-Data-Wrangling&urlpath=rstudio%2F&branch=main)
[![License: CC BY
4.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-CC_BY_4.0-lightgrey.svg)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)

This repository contains the materials for D-Lab's Data Wrangling
workshop. 

### Prerequisites
We recommend attending D-Lab's [R
Fundamentals](https://github.com/dlab-berkeley/R-Fundamentals) series
prior to this workshop.

Check D-Lab's [Learning Pathways](https://dlab-berkeley.github.io/dlab-workshops/python_path.html) to figure out which of our workshops to take!

## Workshop Goals

In this workshop, we provide practical guidance on data wrangling using
R's `tidyverse` suite of packages. In Part 1, we cover how to
**transform** tidydata in order to perform data analysis and
visualization. In Part 2, we cover how to **wrangle** messy data into
tidy data.

## Learning Objectives

After this workshop, you will be able to:

1.  Use `tidyverse` functions for **transforming** your data to be used
    for visualization and analysis

2.  Identify how an "untidy" dataframe gets in the way of data
    visualization and analysis

3.  Use `pivot_longer` and `pivot_wider` to **wrangle** a dataframe into "tidy"
    form, and join multiple dataframes

This workshop does **not** cover the following:

-   Data visualization in R (this is covered in D-Lab's [R Data
    Visualization](https://github.com/dlab-berkeley/R-Data-Visualization)
    workshop)
-   Advanced data analysis in R, such as machine learning (this is
    covered in D-Lab's [R Machine
    Learning](https://github.com/dlab-berkeley/R-Machine-Learning)
    workshop)

**⚠️ At the start of the workshop we will install R, RStudio and the
workshop materials from this repository. If you want to do that yourself
beforehand, please follow the instructions below.**

## Installation Instructions

We will use RStudio to go through the workshop materials, which requires
installation of both the R language and the RStudio software.

1.  [Download R](https://www.r-project.org/): Follow the links according
    to the operating system that you are running. Download the package,
    and install R onto your compute. You should install the most recent
    version (at least version 4.3).

2.  [Download
    RStudio](https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/):
    Install RStudio Desktop. This should be free. Do this after you have
    already installed R. The D-Lab strongly recommends an RStudio
    edition of 2022.02.0+443 "Prairie Trillium" or higher. Check RStudio
    is working by opening up the program.

3.  Download these workshop materials:

    -   Click the green "Code" button in the top right of the repository
        information.

    -   Click "Download Zip".

    -   Extract this file to a folder on your computer where you can
        easily access it (we recommend Desktop).

4.  Optional: If you are familiar with `git`, you can instead clone this
    repository by opening a terminal and entering

## Is RStudio not working on your computer?

If R/RStudio is not installing correctly or you do not wish to download
these programs to your laptop, we *strongly* recommend using the UC
Berkeley Datahub to run the materials for these lessons. You can access
the DataHub by clicking the following button:

[![DataHub](https://img.shields.io/badge/launch-datahub-blue)](https://datahub.berkeley.edu/hub/user-redirect/git-pull?repo=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fdlab-berkeley%2FR-Data-Wrangling&urlpath=rstudio%2F&branch=main)

The DataHub downloads this repository, along with any necessary
packages, and allows you to run the materials in an RStudio instance on
UC Berkeley's servers. No installation is necessary from your end - you
only need an internet browser and a CalNet ID to log in. By using the
DataHub, you can save your work and come back to it at any time. When
you want to return to your saved work, just go straight to the [D-Lab
DataHub](https://dlab.datahub.berkeley.edu), sign in, and you click on
the `[Workshop-Name]` folder.

# Additional Resources

Check out the following resources to learn more about data wrangling in
R:

-   [R for Data Science](https://r4ds.hadley.nz/): *A comprehensive
    online textbook by Hadley Wickham, who helped develop `tidyverse`*

# About the UC Berkeley D-Lab

D-Lab works with Berkeley faculty, research staff, and students to
advance data-intensive social science and humanities research. Our goal
at D-Lab is to provide practical training, staff support, resources, and
space to enable you to use R for your own research applications. Our
services cater to all skill levels and no programming, statistical, or
computer science backgrounds are necessary. We offer these services in
the form of workshops, one-to-one consulting, and working groups that
cover a variety of research topics, digital tools, and programming
languages.

Visit the [D-Lab homepage](https://dlab.berkeley.edu/) to learn more
about us. You can view our
[calendar](https://dlab.berkeley.edu/events/calendar) for upcoming
events, learn about how to utilize our
[consulting](https://dlab.berkeley.edu/consulting) and
[data](https://dlab.berkeley.edu/data) services, and check out upcoming
[workshops](https://dlab.berkeley.edu/events/workshops).

# Other D-Lab R Workshops

Here are other R workshops offered by the D-Lab:

## Basic R

[R Fundamentals](https://github.com/dlab-berkeley/R-Fundamentals)

## Intermediate/Advanced Competency

[R Data
Visualization](https://github.com/dlab-berkeley/R-Data-Visualization)

[R Machine
Learning](https://github.com/dlab-berkeley/r-machine-learning-pilot)
(links to the pilot)

[R Deep Learning](https://github.com/dlab-berkeley/R-Deep-Learning)

# Contributors

[Hero Ashman](https://dlab.berkeley.edu/people/hero-ashman)
